## Defending 

In order to defend against an attack, a the target of that attack must be engaged with the attacker, meaning they are aware of them and so can react to what they do.

Unlike a general opposed roll, each defensive skill works slightly differently, with each filling a specific tactical niche. So:


- *Parry*: uses the skill corresponding to any weapon held to block an attack with that weapon. Parrying only defends against a single attack. However, the attack that is parried is selected by the defender after all attacks have been rolled for. 
  Each level of success (ie. a regular, special or critical parry) subtracts from the attacker's success level.
  
  Shields may be used to parry ranged or melee weapons. Other weapons types can only parry melee weapons.

- *Dodge*: uses the corresponding skill, which starts at DEXx2, to avoid one or more incoming attacks. A number of attacks can be dodged equal to the success level rolled. As with parries, the attacks that is dodged is selected by the defender after all attacks have been rolled for. However, only a single level of success may be applied to any one attack. Excess 
  
  Ranged or melee attacks may be dodged. Dodging requires freedom of movement and so may not be performed if in a close order formation (i.e. shield wall or phalanx).
  
- *Grapple*: uses the corresponding skill to take hold of an attacker's arm or weapon in such a way that they cannot deliver an effective strike.
  Grappling only effects a single opponent, who must be selected in advance, before attack dice are rolled. Any excess successes on a grapple roll, above those required to negate an attack, 
  may be 'banked' as *grapple points*. This allows them to be used on a later round.
   
  While a combatant has at least one grapple point, dodging their attacks is impossible, and only dagger-sized weapons may be used to parry.
  
  Grappling requires both hands free, meaning it can only be combined with unarmed attacks. 
  
  Saved grapple points may be used to increase the success level of a subsequent grapple or unarmed combat roll. Spending points on an attacks represents throwing the opponent; they are no longer grappled. They
  
- *Spirit Combat* allows a discorporate entity to quickly fade into the spirit realm to avoid the attacks of a magic weapon. It can also be used by anyone to defend against spirit combat attacks. 
  Each level of success subtracts from the success level of one or more attackers, without any special restriction.
  
Example: facing three opponents, Attacker A misses,  B hits and C rolls a special. The defender rolls a special. The defender is parrying, and chooses to parry the special hit, entirely negating it. 
However, they still take one regular hit from the B. Had they rolled only a regular success, they would have taken two regular hits, one from B and one from C, downgraded from a special.  

If they had instead chosen to dodge, they could choose to negates B's hit *and* converts C's into a regular success. 
However, they still take one regular hit from C. Had they rolled only a regular success, they would have taken two regular hits.

If they had instead chosen to grapple A, they would gain two grapple points on them. Having survived the hits of B and C, they choose to perform an unarmed attack on A, using both grapple points to boost their success level. They roll a regular success, and A fails their defensive grapple roll. With spending 2 grapple points, this corresponds to a critical success. As all grapple points have been spent, they throw their opponent to the ground. As the attack is a critcal, they choose to do their normal unarmed damage + D6, ignoring armour.  

As they are not discorporate, they cannot use spirit combat as a defence.