

# Heroquest Rules

A covered in the previous section, a heroquest is a ritual adventure. While a small scale ritual might involve only saying the correct words, making the right gestures and gathering the correct ingredients, a heroquest ritual requires doing skillful and dangerous things. In other words, having an adventure. 

That dual nature means that heroquests can be treated in rules terms in two complementary ways; as a ritual, or as an adventure.

## Heroquest as a Ritual

Heroquests rituals can be performed using Runic, Shamanic or Sorcerous ritual magic.

The above diagram shows the chance of casting each of the three major types of magic, either directly, by taking 10 minutes to meditate, or by ritual practises that can last anything up to decades. Sorcery comes out as strongest, both because a spell casting skill can reasonably go higher than a Rune or POWx5, and because sympathetic magic boosts only apply to sorcery.

For simple rituals, the chance of success is rolled directly. When two rituals are in conflict, or a ritual attempts to change or control some aspect of the world, use opposed rolls (RQ:G p142). The strength of the opposition will be based on the power scaling assumptions used for the campaign. Which, if you are using the standard RQ:G scaling described below, means it will often be reducing the chance of ritual success by 150% or more.

This provides a rules justification for the in-world fact that some rituals performed by expert magicians can take decades. The process of building up enough magical energy to make a major change to the world is reflected in the time taken to get the chance of ritual success up to a competitive level in an opposed roll.

The Rune magic form of a heroquest is Common, stackable, with special duration. As a Common Rune spell, it does not have to be sacrificed for in order to be cast. Heroquests are not inherently limited to initiates of any one cult, but each variant of the quest must be individually taught, researched or discovered. So they are sometimes kept as cult secrets, discovered in dusty scrolls in disorganised libraries, taught by wandering mystics, or captured from enemies by violence.

There is a sorcery spell with an analogous effect. Similarly, shamans, or anyone else wandering the Spirit Plane while discorporate, may meet spirits who offer rewards in return for performing some task.


## Heroquest as an Adventure

Alternatively, any heroquest, from a simple initiation ritual to the lightBringer's Quest, can be resolved as a scenario. 

The adventure starts with the casting of a ritual spell, often by an NPC, sometimes entirely off-screen. Rather than actually rolling the dice for success:

1. the chance of the ritual succeeding should inform the design of the scenario; a low chance of success corresponds to a difficult scenario, and vice versa. 

2. the actual outcome of the ritual depends on the player's actions.

If the player's successfully act according to the expectations of the caster, so does the ritual. If not, not. If the players do something unexpected that does not obviously map to success or failure, the ritual results will be correspondingly unexpected.

Ordeals are slightly different from other rituals, as they are often intentionally harder to complete than they strictly need to be, in order to filter out unworthy candidates. The Orlanthi adulthood ordeal has a high pass rate, at least amongst those who have close to the skills and temperament expected of an Orlanthi adult. The tests for Rune Priest and Rune Lord status are more challenging, both absolutely and relative to the skill of a typical candidate.. 

The scenario may involve any number of challenges, or *stages*, that must be met in order to succeed. There will be a path known to the caster that has the predicted difficulty. For a ritual that has a reasonable chance of success, then along that path, guardians you are expected to fight will be beatable, cliffs you need to climb will be scalable, and so forth. Other paths may be easier or harder. Creative solutions may well work; trying something obvious you have been warned against will rarely go well.

The difficulty should be assessed based on the expected skill level and resources of a typical person or group who will attempt the heroquest. If a young adult attempts a quest apppropriate for a tribal champion, they will find the known path virtually impossible, and so must innovate, or get incredibly lucky, to have any chance of success. 


## Key Rules challenges

### Power Scaling

In previous RQ editions:

- skill advancement was generally capped at 100 + category bonus. 

- Gods and monsters could have skill levels of 400 or even 2000%.

So it was apparent some form of 'heroquest rules' were needed to develop heroes who could fight those monsters. 

The diagram above shows the ranges of combat abilities for a variety of creatures and NPCs from current RQ:G publications, including the Bestiary and LoRQ:DP. The highest value found was 140%, for Ironhoof the Centaur, a Hero who has his own counter in the Dragon Pass boardgame. There are no available statistics for Jar Eel or Harrek, the superheroes of the boardgame, but presumably they would be in the range 150 to 200%. Few PCs would have a meaningful chance of surviving a duel with either, as even without them using magic or special abilities they would be reducing the chance to defend against their attacks by ~100%. 

As such, in RQ:G there is no need for a version of the rules that scales to higher values, like a 'Super Runequest'. Instead the range of possible opponents is compressed to those the system works for. There are people the PCs probably can't beat in a fair fight, and those they almost certainly can't. For most campaigns, there is little need for anything more.

### Linearity

When written out as a myth, a heroquest is necessarily linear; one thing happens, then another. This can work adequately in a game, but offering players meaningful choices is preferable.

So each myth should be treated as a traveller's report from the Other Side, an account of the path they took. The fact that the myth was recorded means tha the traveller returned, which means that path was survivable, at least to them. Many other paths would not have been. On the other hand, there may be a road not taken which is actually easier. Especially to someone who has some knowledge or power the original author of the myth lacked.

So when preparing a scenario or play session involving a heroquest, it is important to build in options, contingencies and scope for improvisation.

### Group Size

Most roleplaying sessions involve a group of 3 to 8 players. In most cases, a heroquest that is played out as a full scenario should involve everyone.  Those that require a single protagonist can easily be resolved offscreen, or in a brief montage, using the ritual rules as above.

So, for example, when a PC qualifies as a Rune Lord, the corresponding ritual ordeal that grants them the corresponding powers would naturally be undertaken alone. It can certainly be played out as a solo session, but in many cases, it will make sense to treat it as a ritual, resolved by a single opposed roll. And as always, if rolling for that does not make sense, the GM need not do so (RQ:G p141).

So for established cults with defined qualifications for Rune levels, the actual ordeal will normally be a formality. For PCs who lack the support of the cult hierarchy, perhaps because they do not fully meet the qualifications, then the chance of success will be lower. In such a case, it may be that their friends and allies outside the cult hierarchy (i.e. the other PCs) can help them out.

For both solo and group quests, each participant adopts a ritual role. This can be a known deity such as Orlanth, an obscure figure such as the Azure Guardian, or any other figure which might appears in myth. There is no requirement that the underlying myth actually mentions their participation, merely that it is plausible that they could have been present.  Orlanthi heroquesting parties make heavy reference to the Thunder Brothers, Orlanth's sworn companions. Solar heroquesters reference the members of Yelm's court, and so on. 

Participants need not be a perfect embodiment of that role, but things risk going wrong if they are incapable of performing it.

## Playing out a Heroquest

Each heroquest participant and supporter contributes POW and/or RP to the ritual to create a Quest Pool. RP contributed in this way are tied up until the quest ends, and lost if it fails.

At the key stages of the quest, each participant may only cast Rune magic that corresponds to their ritual role. The same applies to using Rune abilities as an augment.

Participants may use the Quest Pool to pay for Rune magic corresponding to their role. They must still know the spell. Rune Spells cast from the Quest Pool can be stacked up to the limit of the Quest Pool or the caster's CHA, whichever is lower. 

Deviating from an assigned role, especially by using personal Rune Magic that not provided by the role, will have unpredictable effects. It may fail the ritual, or transform it into one with a different effect.

A heroquest ritual usually has a single digit number of stages, or encounters, which must be performed successfully in the face of opposition appropriate to the power of the ritual. So a personal initiation ordeal may require opposition of the level of a single weak broo or dangerous animal. A ritual contest to become tribal king (i.e. a Crown Test) requires a more impressive feat.

These encounters can simply be arranged in sequence, so the PCs pass from one to the other. Or they could have connecting 



At the culmination of the ritual, any unspent RP left in the Quest Pool may be converted into rewards. This can involve using them directly to perform some unique magical effect analogous to Divine Intervention. 
The magical strength of the entity powering this divine intervention will always be comparable to the entities that must be overcome at the  

Any left over after the Divine Intervention resolves can be spent to learn some Rune Spell not otherwise available.
Typically a new spell learnt in this way will be one use. Making it reusable requires something akin to founding a spirit cult, or acquiring a Hero Soul (see below).

### Otherworld Encoubters

The heroquest ritual does not inherently provide access to the Other Side. However it can be visited in any of the usual ways while performing the ritual; via worship ceremonies, the Discorporation spell, or sorcerous portals. Or you can of course simply fly to the Moon, or die and go to the Underworld.




### Mundane Encounters


### Reward Stage


## Example



- worship ce 


The Ritual Strength (RS) is defined as the amount by which the chance to succeed exceeds 100. So a ritual with 150% chance to succeed has a strength of 59.

When in the mundane world, this represents the strength of the opposition that must be overcome for the quest to be fully successful. This limits the power of purely this-world quests, in

On the Other Side, 



# Optional Rule Extensions


## Condition Runes


For PCs, the starting skill level can be as low as 20%, and is usually limited to ~90%. However, there is explicitly no cap on skill advancement by experience; see RQ:G p416. Long term regular play might involve as much as 50 sessions per year continuing for several years. 
Looking at the pregenerated characters, Vasana has a 5% manipulation bonbus, Harmast has 20%. So after several years Harmast might be adding (250/5) * 3.5 = 175 to their starting skill, while Vasana is only adding 40%.

PC rules do not necessarily apply to NPCs, so the comparatively low values of NPC skills don't in themselves mean this rule is problematic. However, this rule does mean that after a few years play, some PCs would be able to defeat any published NPC in a duel without muich risk. While it is possible to adjust NPC statistics correspondingly to avoid that, that is a lot of GM prep work. And if the results of that are published, they will need adjustment to be usable by those who do not play so regularly.

Similarly, perfect balance may not be a requirement, but the vast emergent difference between those with high and low category modifiers will not be to some people's taste.


If either issue is felt to be a problem, one option is to:

- give each PC a rating in Mastery/Magic/Spirit/Law, which is added to the experience roll in the same way as category modifier

- have advancement only happen if the resulting total is above the skill value, dropping the rule that an adjusted roll of 100+ is always a success.

The Mastery Rune is used for increasing physical skills, Magic for Worship and Meditation, Spirit for Spirit Combat and other shamanic skills, Law for sorcery skills, and Infinity for other Condition Runes.

This gives a theoretical upper limit of about 350% for a character with a +50 category modifier, 100% infinity Rune and 200% in a Condition Rune. Such a character would be a literal God. 

More pragmatically, choosing appropriate condition rune ratings for the PCs in your campaign allows control of the speed of advancement, and the limit any single skill can hit. Power So you could have PCs who becomes peers of Harrek after perhaps two years play, without them being able to trivially defeat him after three.

## Hero Soul 


While in the mundane world, 




- Character Growth

- Heroes


New Common Rituals

Provide Support

Support


The Red Book of Magic has ~500 examples; a heroquest that can be done relatively safely by someoine with appropriate preparation and training is just a Rune Spell.

So a hero power to not be a Rune Spell, I think there are two possible reasons:

- it is newly discovered, and the guy who did so has not yet founded a cult passing on the ability

- the quest to gain the ability can't be successfully performed by someone without superhuman abilities 

In neither case will it be widespread. But I can see there is room for someone who discovers a new power (e..g Death Stare) to find that allows them to complete heroquests (e.g. Become Unaging) that are reasonably well known in the right circles.

provide a mechanical role for :20-condition-mastery:,:20-condition-magic:, :20-form-spirit:,:20-rune-law: and :20-condition-infinity:.
no other new skills or characteristics.
few, or no, new abstract nouns (wyter, other side, shaman, etc is enough terminology to be getting on with)
compatible with current RQ:G character generation rules
compatible with published RQ:G stats for Ironhoof, the Bat and the Hydra.
capable of providing a usable stat block for Jar Eel and Harrek
_broadly_ compatible with existing wider canon, including WB&RM, KoDP and Six Ages.
mechanically sound
easy to ignore or handwave if they get in the way of the game.


Interim minimum heroquest rules:

A Heroquest is a magical ritual with a percentage chance of success.
Off-screen, there is a complex system is some unpublished book that determines that chance.
On screen, you are running a scenario to replace that die roll.